(upbeat music)
(typing)
I said in the last video
that we were gonna move on
to the implementation of radix sort,
but when I was looking over the implementation,
I thought it would be helpful to go through
the stable counting sort that we're going to use first,
before we actually get to the implementation.
So that's what we're gonna do in this video.
So as I said in the video about counting sort,
the implementation that I showed you was unstable.
If you want it to be stable, we have to do some extra work.
Now the implementation that I'm going to show you calculates
where values should be written back to the original array,
and then by writing the values into the array
in backwards order, we get stability,
and I think probably going through the slides
will make this clear.
In the last video, we went through sorting this array,
and I'm going to go through the stable counting sort
for when we sort the array based on the 10's position.
And so if you look at the last video,
we've already sorted based on the one's position,
and we end up with the array on the screen,
and now we're going to sort this array
based on the 10's position,
and the reason we're looking at the 10's
is because the 10's actually have some duplicate values.
So 1594
has to remain after 8792
after the sort,
and 5729
has to remain after 4725,
'cause the sort has to be stable.
So how are we gonna accomplish this using counting sort.
So what we do, is we do the count just as we did before,
and we're gonna end up with the counting array below.
So we have two values that have two in the 10's position,
4725 and 5729,
1330 has a three in the 10's position,
and then we don't have any fours, fives, sixes, or sevens
in the 10's position.
4586 has eight in the 10's position,
and then we have two values
with nine in the 10's position,
8792 and 1594,
and so our counting array is what you see in the bottom,
zero, zero, two, one, zero, zero, zero, zero, one, two,
and so that tells us we have two values with a two
in the 10's position,
one value with three in the 10's position,
one value with eight in the 10's position,
and two values with nine in the 10's position,
and that's all fine and dandy
but how are we gonna write these values back?
'Cause we don't actually have the values
in the counting array,
and on top of that, we want the sort to be stable.
And so what we're gonna so is we're going to create
a temporary array that matches the length
of the array we're sorting.
And so we're going to create
a temporary array of length six,
because we're sorting six values.
And we can use the counts to figure out
which range of indices in the temporary array
will be occupied by each value.
For example,
because we don't have any zeros
in the 10's position and any ones,
we know that the two values that have a two
in the 10's position are going to occupy
positions zero and one in the sorted array.
And then we have one value with a three
in the 10's position,
so we know that'll go into position two.
And then we don't have any values
with four, five, six, and seven,
but we have one value with an eight,
so we know that's going to go into position three,
and then positions four and five are gonna hold
the two values that have a nine in the 10's position.
So because we know how many values we're sorting,
and because we know how many of each value
have a specific digit in their 10's position,
we can figure out what range of positions the values
with a specific digit in the 10's position are gonna occupy.
The way that we figure out these ranges is
after we've done our first counting pass,
and we've ended up with our usual counting array,
we adjust the counts.
So instead of just keeping the number of values
that have a specific 10's digit,
we want to store how many values
have a specific 10's digit or less.
So for example, at index three in the counting array,
which currently contains the number of values
that have a three in the 10's position.
Instead of that, we want to know how many values
have three or less in the 10's position,
and in this case that's three values right?
Because we have two values that have two
in the 10's position
and one value that has three in the 10's position,
and so we have three values
that have a three or less in the 10's position.
And we can calculate how many values
have a specific digit or less by summing up
all the counts that come before it.
And so for example, by summing up zero, zero, two, and one,
we get three, and that's how many values
have a three or less in the 10's position, right?
Because we don't have any values with zero,
we don't have any values with one,
we have two values with two and one value with three.
And so after we've adjusted our counts, this is what we get.
So we don't have any values with zero.
We don't have any values with one or less.
We have two values with two or less.
We have three values with three or less,
and then three values with four or less,
three values with five or less.
Up to the value for eight,
where we have four values that have eight or less,
and then finally we have six values with nine or less,
and that last position
is always gonna basically equal the number of values we have
because everything in the array is gonna have
the highest possible digit or letter, or less.
And so this is our adjusted count array,
where each element, instead of containing the exact count
of how many values
have a specific digit in their 10's position,
instead it contains a count
of how many values have that digit or less.
And now we're going to use that
to write back to our input array.
So the code at the top is what we're going to use.
So we initialise our temp array,
and n is the number of elements we're sorting.
So we'll have a temp array of length six.
And then, we traverse the array backwards.
So we traverse the array from right to left,
because this is going to make us write
the rightmost values before the leftmost values
and that's what's going to ensure stability.
And so we start with n of six,
k is gonna go from five to zero.
So when k is five,
we're going to get the digit in the 10's position,
that's what that getDigit method is doing,
and we're going to get it for input k,
and k is starting at five.
So if we go back,
that's 5729.
We're going to look at countArray[2],
because we're going to figure out that
the getDigit call is going to return two.
And so we're gonna index countArray[2],
and we're using the prefix operator
so we're gonna subtract one from countArray[2],
that's gonna give us one.
And then we're going to assign input k,
which we just saw back here is 5729.
We're gonna assign that into tmp[1].
So let's go through that one more time.
We're going to get the digit
of input five,
the 10's digit,
and that digit is two, 'cause we're dealing with 5729.
And then we're going to decrement the value at countArray[2]
which is gonna give us one.
And then we're going to use that result as the index
into our temp array.
So we're gonna assign input of k, input five,
which is 5729,
into temp at position one.
And so we're gonna end up with this situation,
where we have 5729
in the temp array.
So now we have the temp array at the top,
and our count array at the bottom.
Now we've decremented countArray[2] by one,
because we're written one value
with two in the 10's position,
and notice that it's gone into temp array one.
And so the second value that has two
is gonna go into temp array zero.
And because we're going right to left in the input array,
we're writing rightmost values before leftmost values.
So that means if we have a duplicate,
the rightmost duplicate will be written
to the right of the leftmost duplicate,
and that's what's preserving the stability.
And so now k is gonna get decremented to four.
We're gonna be handling value 4586.
The 10's digit is eight.
So we're gonna decrement countArray[8] by one,
which will give us three,
and so we're gonna assign 4586 into temp at position three.
And we're gonna end up with this situation.
So 4586 has gone into the temporary array at position three,
and countArray[8] is now three,
because we've decremented it by one
'cause we've written out one value was eight
in the 10's position.
So now k will be three, so we're gonna be handling 4725,
that has a two in the 10's position.
We're gonna decrement countArray[2]
so that's gonna become zero.
And so we're gonna assign 4725 to temp zero.
And so this is our array,
and notice that we have preserved the relative positions
of 4725 and 5729,
because we're going right to left.
So when we write the rightmost duplicate value,
we write that value into the rightmost position
of the set of positions for that 10's value.
And so we knew that the two values
that have a two in the 10's position
were gonna occupy positions zero and one.
And so we write the rightmost value in the original array
into position one,
and the leftmost value into position zero.
And by doing that we have preserved the relative positions.
So this is a stable sort.
And you'll notice now that countArray[2] is zero
because we've now written out both values
with two in the 10's position.
So now when k equals two,
we're gonna be handling value 1594,
it has a nine in the 10's position
so we're gonna decrement countArray[9].
It'll become five,
and then we assign 1594 to temp five.
And so the rightmost value with nine
is being written in the rightmost position,
for values that have nine in the 10's position.
k will be one, we'll handle 8792.
We decrement countArray[9] to four,
and we assign 8792 to temp four,
and we have preserved
the relative positions of 8792 and 1594.
And then finally k will be zero, we'll handle 1330.
We'll subtract one from countArray[3] to get two,
and we'll write 1330 to position two in the temporary array.
And there we go,
we have completed our sort of the values
based on the 10's position,
and the relative positioning of any duplicates
have been preserved.
And so this is a stable counting sort.
It works because we traverse
the input array from right to left,
and we write duplicate values
into the temp array from right to left.
So if we know that duplicate values will go into,
let's say positions three and four,
we write the rightmost value in the input array
into position four
and the leftmost value into position three,
and this preserves the relative positioning
of duplicate values.
And so by adjusting the counting array
after the initial pass,
so that we, instead of storing just the raw counts,
instead we store how many values
have that value or less.
So for us, it was how many values
have a specific digit or less in the 10's position.
We can use those adjusted counts
to map values back to indices in the temp array.
Now another way of doing this
is to use something called linked lists,
we haven't covered those yet.
We'll be covering those soon.
But another way of doing this,
is instead of just using counts the way that we did,
you can actually store a list of the actual values
at each position in a count array,
and then you write the list out backwards.
So we're not gonna cover that,
because we haven't covered linked lists yet,
but that's another way that you could do it.
Now obviously we've sorted into a temporary array,
so at this step here the top array is a temporary array.
So obviously there would be one more step,
and that would be copying the temporary array
back into the input array.
Okay so that's it for the stable counting sort.
The code up here is the code
that we're actually gonna use in the implementations.
So now that you've seen it,
when we code the implementation, I won't have to spend time
trying to explain to you what's going on,
and not having any slides to do it.
So I thought that having slides and going through it
would make it easier for you to understand.
So now finally,
let's move on to the implementation of radix sort.
I'll see you in the next video.